# Adedayo MO. Comprehensive Profiling of Gut Microbiome Modulation in Response to Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) Exposure.

Overview

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) are environmental pollutants formed from the incomplete burning of organic matter such as fossil fuels, tobacco smoke and charred foods. These environmental pollutants have raised growing concern due to their widespread presence and potential impact on health, having been linked to immune dysregulation, metabolic diseases, reduced reproductive capacity and increased risk of cancer. Its effects on host health have also been linked to microbial mediation as the gut microbiome plays a significant role in xenobiotic metabolism, including PAHs, both by directly modifying xenobiotics and by influencing host gene expression related to detoxification. Hence, a key emerging question is how the gut microbiome—a complex and dynamic ecosystem—responds to different durations of PAH exposure. To explore this, I created a reproducible R-based analysis pipeline that comprehensively profiles microbial community responses to acute and sub-chronic PAH exposure scenarios using simulated 16S rRNA gene sequencing data. <br />

Building on methodological frameworks in microbial ecology and classification modeling, this pipeline applies a multi-analytical approach in R combining microbial diversity analysis, differential abundance testing, and supervised machine learning. Starting with raw read count data, I implemented data cleaning, normalization, and transformation steps where I filtered out various taxonomic level classifications other than the bacteria classes as "Class" emerged as the most occurring taxonomic level in the microbiome data. I then calculated relative abundances of the 17 taxonomic classes available and combined the relative abundances with the metadata file which contains each sample's study group (4 groups: 'Con_Acute' (acute control), 'Con_SC' (subchronic control), 'Dose_Acute' (acute PAH exposure), and 'Dose_SC' (subchronic PAH exposure)), sex (Male and Female), location ('Sm_Intestine' (Small Intestine) and 'L_Intestine' (Large Intestine)). I plotted the relative abundances of bacteria classes across samples and locations. The vegan R package was used to calculate  alpha (Shannon diversity which accounts for both richness and evenness) and beta (Bray-Curtis distances) diversity metrics, visualizing group-wise differences using boxplots and PCOAs respectively, and performing PERMANOVA. I also assessed the influence of the study group and the interaction effect of the study group and sex on the community differences. Kruskal Wallis tests were used to identify differentially abundant taxa, and a random forest classifier was trained to assess whether microbial composition could accurately predict exposure conditions. The predictive value of the random forest model was assessed via confusion matrices and feature importance plots. The resulting pipeline can serve as a template for other users seeking to integrate classic ecological indices with predictive modeling for environmental microbiome studies. All scripts and visualizations are available in a public GitHub repository for reproducibility and adaptation: [Repo]"https://github.com/Keji1023/RMII.git" <br />

While the R script successfully combines microbial diversity analysis, differential abundance testing, and supervised machine learning, there were several challenges. Due to the variable nature of the simulated data used, the cleaning process resulted in  significant loss of taxonomic level classifications such as phylum, family. This loss of taxonomic levels was particularly significant when I attempted ANCOM-BC (Analysis of compositions of microbiomes with bias correction) using ANCOM-BC2, a R Bioconductor package. The result of ANCOM-BC2 were unreliable as only 8 class level taxa passed the internal filtering criteria (non-zero abundance, prevalence, etc.). However, at least 50 taxa are needed to ensure reliable and statistically powered for corrected sample-specific compositional bias. In addition, I later learned about phyloseq, another R package specifically designed for microbiome community analysis which would have  streamlined the majority of my analytical approach using rarefied OTU tables. In the future, I hope to apply my R script to published data and learn more about 16S rRNA sequencing data processing using QIIME2 and DADA2.

References:
1. Breiman, L. (2001). Random Forests. Machine Learning, 45(1), 5–32. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010933404324
2. Garcia, W. L., Miller, C. J., Lomas, G. X., Gaither, K. A., Tyrrell, K. J., Smith, J. N., Brandvold, K. R., & Wright, A. T. (2022). Profiling How the Gut Microbiome Modulates Host Xenobiotic Metabolism in Response to Benzo[a]pyrene and 1-Nitropyrene Exposure. Chemical Research in Toxicology, 35(4), 585–596. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrestox.1c00360
3. Li, Y., Ma, H., & Wang, J. (2024). Effects of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons on the gut-testis axis. Ecotoxicology and Environmental Safety, 280, 116539. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2024.116539
4. Mallah, M. A., Changxing, L., Mallah, M. A., Noreen, S., Liu, Y., Saeed, M., Xi, H., Ahmed, B., Feng, F., Mirjat, A. A., Wang, W., Jabar, A., Naveed, M., Li, J.-H., & Zhang, Q. (2022). Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon and its effects on human health: An overeview. Chemosphere, 296, 133948. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2022.133948
5. Oksanen, J., Simpson, G. L., Blanchet, F. G., Kindt, R., Legendre, P., Minchin, P. R., O’Hara, R. B., Solymos, P., Stevens, M. H. H., Szoecs, E., Wagner, H., Barbour, M., Bedward, M., Bolker, B., Borcard, D., Carvalho, G., Chirico, M., Caceres, M. D., Durand, S., … Borman, T. (2025). vegan: Community Ecology Package (Version 2.6-10). https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/vegan/index.html
6. R Core Team. 2025. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. from https://www.r-project.org/
7. Statnikov, A., Henaff, M., Narendra, V., Konganti, K., Li, Z., Yang, L., Pei, Z., Blaser, M. J., Aliferis, C. F., & Alekseyenko, A. V. (2013). A comprehensive evaluation of multicategory classification methods for microbiomic data. Microbiome, 1(1), 11. https://doi.org/10.1186/2049-2618-1-11
8. Yu, X., Lv, K., Guan, S., Zhang, X., & Sun, L. (2021). Long-term exposure to phenanthrene at environmental-level induces intestinal dysbiosis and disrupted hepatic lipid metabolism in mice. Environmental Pollution, 268, 115738. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2020.115738
9. Zhang, L., Wang, Y., Chen, J., & Chen, J. (2022). RFtest: A Robust and Flexible Community-Level Test for Microbiome Data Powerfully Detects Phylogenetically Clustered Signals. Frontiers in Genetics, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2021.749573
10. Zhang, W., Sun, Z., Zhang, Q., Sun, Z., Su, Y., Song, J., Wang, B., & Gao, R. (2021). Preliminary evidence for an influence of exposure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons on the composition of the gut microbiota and neurodevelopment in three-year-old healthy children. BMC Pediatrics, 21, 86. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12887-021-02539-w

Files Included in this repository: <br />
- Prospectus <br />
- Analysis Tutorial presentation <br />
- R script for analysis tutorial <br />
- Analysis tutorial code images <br />
